[Music]
13 Secret Service
during the Civil War the combination of
new revenue legislation and scandals
within the Treasury Department prompted
congressional action with a view to
providing the Secretary of the Treasury
with some investigative authority to
deal with fraud in 1863 legislation was
enacted authorizing the secretary to
quote a point not exceeding three
revenue agents to aid in the prevention
detection and Punishment of frauds upon
the revenue end quote from these
statutory origins would evolve the
Intelligence Division and security
Inspection Division of the current
Internal Revenue Service and the
enforcement branch of the Alcohol
Tobacco and Firearms division from the
experience of this early investigative
authority and the need to operationalize
prior mandates regarding the prevention
of counterfeiting a secret service
division was established within the
Treasury Department in July 1865 to be
initially supervised by the solicitor of
the Treasury and later by an assistant
secretary and in 1933 came under the
direct authority of the secretary the
head of the new organization William P
wood was sworn in on July 5th a close
personal friend of Secretary of War
Stanton would undoubtedly became
acquainted with Lafayette Baker while
serving as keeper of the Old Capitol
prison and he may also have known
Pinkerton or his operatives he served as
both a detective and as a spy in
Stanton's employ and was detailed on one
occasion to the Treasury Department to
probe counterfeiting matters while
running the Old Capitol prison quote
would assigned undercover agents to
posed as Southern sympathizers who could
smuggle mail from Richmond to Washington
the letters were brought to him at the
prison where he skillfully opened read
copied and resealed them for
transmission to their destinations the
information they contained was funneled
to Stanton's office and served as
valuable leads for the conduct of the
war prospective movements of southern
forces were revealed in this way in
plans for Lee's northern advances which
ended in the Battle of Gettysburg end
quote
footnote Walter s Bowen and Harry Edward
Neil the United States Secret Service
Philadelphia and in New York Chilton
Company 1960 page 13 and footnote as
head of the Secret Service would had a
force of approximately 30 men some of
whom were former private detectives he
had known while pursuing counterfeiters
and others were personal friends he had
directed in wartime intelligence
activities six general orders guided
these personnel one each man must
recognize that his service belongs to
the government through 24 hours of every
day to all must agree to assignment to
the locations chosen by the chief and
respond to whatever mobility of movement
the work might require three all must
exercise such careful saving of money
spent for travel subsistence and
payments for information and as can be
self-evidently justified for continuing
employment in the service will depend
upon demonstrated fitness ability as
investigators and honesty and fidelity
in all transactions five the title of
regular employees will be operative
Secret Service temporary employees will
be assistant operatives or informants
six all employment will be at a daily
pay rate accounts submitted monthly each
operative will be expected to keep on
hand enough personal reserve funds to
carry on service business between pay
days end quote distributed among eleven
cities with a national office in
Washington the agents carried no badges
or official identification other than
handwritten letters of appointment US
Marshals and other Peace Officers were
notified by circular of the existence of
the new organization and its purposes
at the end of its first year of
operation the agency had captured over
200 counterfeiters and had established a
close working relationship with marshals
local police departments and United
States Attorney's in various localities
would remained in charge of the Secret
Service until 1869 when he was succeeded
by Herman C Whitley who like wood had
been an Army detective during the war
and had later associated himself with
the Internal Revenue Bureau over the
next half century the service would be
led by seven other men Secret Service
Chiefs William P would 1865 to 1869
Hermann C Whitley 1869 to 1874 Elmer
Washburn 1874 to 1876 James J Brooks
1876 to 1888 John s Bell 1888 through
1890 al Drummond 1891 to 1894 William P
Hazen 1894 to 1898 John E Wilkie 1898 to
1911 William J Flynn 1912 through 1917
during this period the Secret Service
investigated a variety of matters in
addition to counterfeiting including the
Mafia gambling interests peonage
practices the security of Treasury
Department facilities concerned with the
production of securities and money
alcohol revenue enforcement and the
activities of the Ku Klux Klan the
intelligence structures and techniques
developed in conjunction with these
probes are difficult to assess the
Secret Service was a permanent structure
with regional offices in pursuing
counterfeiters organized crime and
gambling interests the service
cooperated with various sub national law
enforcement agencies and informers
concentrating on these subjects the
organization undoubtedly cultivated
sources of continuing intelligence at
the local level before the advent of
World War one in 1902 in the aftermath
of
the assassination of president William
McKinley the Secret Service was assigned
the function of protecting the president
a mission which would encourage
intelligence gathering regarding any and
all enemies of the chief executive this
is our hidden history
you